## Why developping our own UI ?

When I first develop my web app using react, I didn't use any UI library. I didn't want to boilerplate the project. My development goal was a clean and thin project. Back in time I was learning React, and it's a good idea not to add complexity. Eventually, I got a working app without any style, using only HTML vanilla inputs, and I learned the basics of React.
Then I wanted an improved version which I could enjoy using. This would force me to study and apply UX/UI fields, and learn React in-depth. To achieve the improved version, I first start to use material-ui, a library for React featuring lots of components using Google Material design. It went well, but I wasn't satisfied with the customisation and JSS + I wasn't learning that much.

When you use UI libraries, all the complex stuff is already here and your job is only to compose the components, tweak around, use specific fix to these libraries, etc... This way you learn how to use this library but not how it works internaly. And you know it's often a better option to learn the language first rather than framework. The worth thing to do for a JS newbie would be to first start to build a web app using a specific UI library built for a specific framework. Instead, when you start with the language, rewriting existing algotihm, data structure enable you to learn using only what the language offers, focusing you on this rather than a library API. It's only after being comfortable with the language that you can add complexity - standard library, then framework, ... Each layer being built on the previous, simpler one. Building your own UI/route/state management library let you focus solely on React capacities so you can become very comfortable with it (or some sides of it, as these libraries doesn't cover all usage of React, particularly deployment, production code, server side rendering aren't covered, but you can't escape it anyway).

Building your own UI library may also means creating your own design system, visual language, and so on. One cons of using existing lib is that, despite customization capabilities, all apps using it will looks pretty much the same. You may change the colors, maybe some of the shape, but you won't be able to change more than that. It's ok for prototyping or if you don't have the resources to elaborate your own. In design, the silver bullet does not exist, there is no such a fit-all-project design system. Design will depend on plateform, usage frequency, users, branding and the project itself. Each big company with client app have taken the time to work out a design system or pattern library, [check this out with Adele](https://adele.uxpin.com/), [top 12 design systems](https://enonic.com/blog/top-12-design-systems).

Another pros is controlling the tech stack. Libraries can come with their dependencies that we have to integrate in order to use them with their full potential. When you are building your own lib, you decide what to use, the technologies you are the most comfortable with, etc... It's a real plus because on the long term, when the motivation from the early days evaporated, working with a tech stack you enjoy will help you to keep going.

Last (but not least :), you can build a solution specific for your needs, cutting down boilerplate and package size foundf in general-purpose libraries. You could use cutting-edge techniques to reduce bundle-size, enhance efficiency and so on, because you control the tech stack. Older and widely used libs will surely take a lot of time before using these techniques.

## Design choices

One goal I had when I started designing the lib was to keep it thin & light. Relying on ES6 module & Webpack, only imported functions are bundled, so I didn't wanted to exports large multi-features generic components that supports a bunch of edge-case. What is the strategy when it comes to supporting new features? How to enable composition of features & components? For example: the Button. One may want to have a button with ripple effect, the other one without, or with elevation, icons, etc. Of course if I include a simple button with none of the above, I don't want to include the code handling ripple, elevation & co in my bundle. A simple solution could be to create differents button with only the required features, depending on the current needs. As it's a combinatory of feature, the number of specific components to support in lib-land will be too high. A good choice would be to provide the tools for the user to compose it's own component: a simple button with extra elevation & ripple for example. Is it possible to do something as simple as `myButtonWithRipple = pipe(button, rippleEffect)`? How the rippleEffect could know how to apply his effect on the button? And for more complicated components like a date picker? It must be more specific on which part of the component it has to have the effect on. A solution I used for my lib was: defining features/effects as a prop object. By prop object, I mean an object that will be spread on a target component to apply specific values to specific properties belonging to this component. By default all my custom component properties inherit from HTML Div attributes. Then, it applies unused properties on its main div. It makes sense for small or simple components: the main div is generally the one to customize If i want special effects like ripple or elevation. For complex component, a solution would be to break it down into multiple components, and allow user to change the inner components as long as they implements some properties needed for the host, complex component. Specifiying inner components would allow user to customize them like the small one. Uber component customization use a similar solution: